[Docs] add docs on peft diffusers integration (#5359)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/tutorials/using_peft_for_inference.md

But guess what? PEFT is not limited to just language models. It is modality-agnostic. This means it can be applied to pure vision models, vision-language models, speech models, and so on.

PEFT is natively integrated into Diffusers allowing users to take advantage of its support for doing efficient multi-adapter inference, swapping in and swapping out adapters, etc. In this guide, we walk through such use cases with [Stable Diffusion XL](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl), making you fully equipped with how you can take advantage of PEFT for adapter inference when using Diffusers.

Throughout this guide, we will use LoRA as the main adapter technique. As such, we will sometimes refer to LoRA as adapter and vice-versa. This guide assumes that you're familiar with LoRA. If you're not, we welcome you to check out [this guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/training/lora).

Let's first install all the required libraries.

```bash
!pip install -q transformers accelerate
!pip install -q git+https://github.com/huggingface/peft.git
# To remove the branch once it's merged.

> !pip install -q git+https://github.com/younesbelkada/diffusers.git@peft-part-2

Reviewer: Let's keep in mind to change that once #5151 gets merged

```

## Load the SDXL pipeline

```python
from diffusers import DiffusionPipeline
import torch

pipe_id = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(pipe_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
```

## Loading a LoRA checkpoint

We'll start by loading a LoRA checkpoint using the `load_lora_weights()` method. If you have used `diffusers` before for LoRA inference, you're probably already familiar with the method.

But with our new integration with PEFT, you can do much more with `load_lora_weights()` as you will notice in a moment.

Note that we assign a specific `adapter_name` to the checkpoint, so that we can easily switch between different LoRA checkpoints. Let's call it `"toy"`.

```python
pipe.load_lora_weights("CiroN2022/toy-face", weight_name="toy_face_sdxl.safetensors", adapter_name="toy")
```

And then perform inference:

```python
prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"

lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": lora_scale}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

> ![toy-face](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_8_1.png)

Reviewer: Thanks for uploading the image!

    
Impressive! As you can see, the model was able to generate an image that mixes the characteritics of both adapters.

After performing multi-adapter inference, it's possible to again go back to single-adapter inference. With the `set_adapters()` method, it's easy:

```python
# First, set the adapter.
pipe.set_adapters("toy")

# Then, run inference.
prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"
lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": lora_scale}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

![toy-face-again](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_18_1.png)

## Disabling all adapters

If you want to switch to the base model, you can disable all LoRAs with the `disable_lora()` method.

```python
pipe.disable_lora()

prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"
lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=30, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)).images[0]
image
```

> ![no-lora](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_20_1.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![no-lora](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_20_1.png)

## Monitoring active adapter

You have attached multiple adapters and you are a bit lost on what adapters have been attached to the pipeline's components? You can easily check the list of active adapters using the `get_active_adapters()` method as follows:

`python
active_adapters = pipe.get_active_adapters()
>>> ["toy", "pixel"]
`

You can also monitor the list of all attached adapters in your pipeline by simply calling `get_list_adapters()` that will return you a dictionary containing the component name as a key and the corresponding list of adapters as a value

`python
list_adapters = pipe.get_active_adapters()
>>> {"text_encoder": ["toy", "pixel"], "unet": ["toy", "pixel"], "text_encoder_2": ["toy", "pixel"]}
`

```

an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

[[open-in-colab]] 

# Inference with PEFT

There are many adapters trained in different styles to achieve different effects. You can even combine multiple adapters to create new and unique images. With the 🤗 [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) integration in 🤗 Diffusers, it is really easy to load and manage adapters for inference. In this guide, you'll learn how to use different adapters with [Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL)](./pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl) for inference.

Throughout this guide, you'll use LoRA as the main adapter technique, so we'll use the terms LoRA and adapter interchangeably. You should have some familiarity with LoRA, and if you don't, we welcome you to check out the [LoRA guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/conceptual_guides/lora).

Let's first install all the required libraries.

```bash
!pip install -q transformers accelerate
!pip install -q git+https://github.com/huggingface/peft.git

> # To remove the branch once it's merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Update to stable release once the release is done
```

> !pip install -q git+https://github.com/younesbelkada/diffusers.git@peft-part-2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!pip install -q git+https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers.git
```

<!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

[[open-in-colab]] 

# Inference with PEFT

> From the 🤗 PEFT [documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index):
> 
> > 🤗 PEFT, or Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), is a library for efficiently adapting pre-trained language models (PLMs) to various downstream applications without fine-tuning all the model's parameters. PEFT methods only fine-tune a small number of (extra) model parameters, significantly decreasing computational and storage costs because fine-tuning large-scale PLMs is prohibitively costly. Recent state-of-the-art PEFT techniques achieve performance comparable to that of full fine-tuning.
> 
> But guess what? PEFT is not limited to just language models. It is modality-agnostic. This means it can be applied to pure vision models, vision-language models, speech models, and so on.
> 
> 🤗 PEFT is natively integrated with 🤗 Diffusers, enabling efficient multi-adapter inference. In this guide, you'll learn how to use different adapters with [Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL)](./pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl) for inference.

Reviewer 2: I think option 1 is probably the best since it is more timeless and users don't really know or care "when" this was possible. Perhaps you can do something like this?

```suggestion
There are many adapters trained in different styles to achieve different effects. You can even combine multiple adapters to create new and unique images. With the 🤗 [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) integration in 🤗 Diffusers, it is really easy to load and manage adapters for inference. In this guide, you'll learn how to use different adapters with [Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL)](./pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl) for inference.
```

Throughout this guide, you'll use LoRA as the main adapter technique, so we'll use the terms LoRA and adapter interchangeably. You should have some familiarity with LoRA, and if you don't, we welcome you to check out the [LoRA guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/conceptual_guides/lora).

Let's first install all the required libraries.

```bash
!pip install -q transformers accelerate
!pip install -q git+https://github.com/huggingface/peft.git

> # To remove the branch once it's merged.

Reviewer 3: Small tip, I would always use the template like `# TODO` for this type of comment, which makes it much easier to grep through the code base for things that need changing. In this case, I think `# FIXME` could be even more appropriate, in case this needs to be changed _before_ the PR is merged (`# TODO` would be something that needs changing eventually, but can still be merged as is).

Author: Thank you for the suggestions. These are not standardized across HF so I guess it's okay.

pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(pipe_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
```

Next, load a LoRA checkpoint with the [`~diffusers.loaders.StableDiffusionXLLoraLoaderMixin.load_lora_weights`] method.

With the 🤗 PEFT integration, you can assign a specific `adapter_name` to the checkpoint, which let's you easily switch between different LoRA checkpoints. Let's call this adapter `"toy"`.

```python
pipe.load_lora_weights("CiroN2022/toy-face", weight_name="toy_face_sdxl.safetensors", adapter_name="toy")
```

And then perform inference:

```python
prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"

lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": lora_scale}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

![toy-face](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_8_1.png)
    

With the `adapter_name` parameter, it is really easy to use another adapter for inference! Load the [nerijs/pixel-art-xl](https://huggingface.co/nerijs/pixel-art-xl) adapter that has been fine-tuned to generate pixel art images, and let's call it `"pixel"`.

> The pipeline automatically sets the first loaded adapter (`"toy"`) as the active adapter. But you can activate the `"pixel"` adapter with the `set_adapters()` method as shown below:

Author: @stevhliu I wanted provide a doc link to the methods like `set_adapters()`, `get_active_adapters()`, etc. But they are in https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/5151/files#diff-6a3b9a08c1d37dbc341131632415fea800af242a84fb31f1bcd40d725e2eeeebR334. How should we cite them in this case?

Reviewer 2: Oh I see, those methods haven't been merged yet! In that case, maybe merge that PR first and then you can this:

```md
[`~diffusers.models.modeling_utils.set_adapter`]
[`~diffusers.models.modeling_utils.active_adapters`]
```

By the way, I noticed in that [PR](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/5151/files#diff-6a3b9a08c1d37dbc341131632415fea800af242a84fb31f1bcd40d725e2eeeebR334) the method is `set_adapter` but in the docs here it is `set_adapters` (same for `get_active_adapters` vs `active_adapters`). Are these referring to the same methods or is it just a typo?

> 🤗 PEFT, or Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), is a library for efficiently adapting pre-trained language models (PLMs) to various downstream applications without fine-tuning all the model's parameters. PEFT methods only fine-tune a small number of (extra) model parameters, significantly decreasing computational and storage costs because fine-tuning large-scale PLMs is prohibitively costly. Recent state-of-the-art PEFT techniques achieve performance comparable to that of full fine-tuning.

But guess what? PEFT is not limited to just language models. It is modality-agnostic. This means it can be applied to pure vision models, vision-language models, speech models, and so on.

PEFT is natively integrated into Diffusers allowing users to take advantage of its support for doing efficient multi-adapter inference, swapping in and swapping out adapters, etc. In this guide, we walk through such use cases with [Stable Diffusion XL](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/stable_diffusion_xl), making you fully equipped with how you can take advantage of PEFT for adapter inference when using Diffusers.

> Throughout this guide, we will use LoRA as the main adapter technique. As such, we will sometimes refer to LoRA as adapter and vice-versa. This guide assumes that you're familiar with LoRA. If you're not, we welcome you to check out [this guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/training/lora).

Author: Didn't realize we have a guide for LoRA. Thanks so much, Steven!

import torch

pipe_id = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0"
pipe = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(pipe_id, torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
```

## Loading a LoRA checkpoint

We'll start by loading a LoRA checkpoint using the `load_lora_weights()` method. If you have used `diffusers` before for LoRA inference, you're probably already familiar with the method.

But with our new integration with PEFT, you can do much more with `load_lora_weights()` as you will notice in a moment.

Note that we assign a specific `adapter_name` to the checkpoint, so that we can easily switch between different LoRA checkpoints. Let's call it `"toy"`.

```python
pipe.load_lora_weights("CiroN2022/toy-face", weight_name="toy_face_sdxl.safetensors", adapter_name="toy")
```

And then perform inference:

```python
prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"

lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": lora_scale}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

![toy-face](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_8_1.png)
    

> ## Loading another adapter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Next, we load the adapter from `nerijs/pixel-art-xl` that has been fine-tuned to generate pixel art images. Let's call this one `"pixel"`!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the `adapter_name` parameter, it is really easy to use another adapter for inference! Load the [nerijs/pixel-art-xl](https://huggingface.co/nerijs/pixel-art-xl) adapter that has been fine-tuned to generate pixel art images, and let's call it `"pixel"`.
```

> The pipeline will automatically set the first loaded adapter as the active adapter. But you can activate the adapter with which you want to run inference with by using the `set_adapters()` method as shown below:

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to link to `set_adapters()` API docs as well

```suggestion
The pipeline automatically sets the first loaded adapter (`"toy"`) as the active adapter. But you can activate the `"pixel"` adapter with the `set_adapters()` method as shown below:
```

```python
pipe.load_lora_weights("nerijs/pixel-art-xl", weight_name="pixel-art-xl.safetensors", adapter_name="pixel")
pipe.set_adapters("pixel")
```

> Let's now generate the image with the second adapter and check the result:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's now generate an image with the second adapter and check the result:
```

```python
prompt = "a hacker with a hoodie, pixel art"
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": lora_scale}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

![pixel-art](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_12_1.png)
    

> ## Combining multiple adapters!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Combine multiple adapters
```

> With the PEFT integration, it's easy to perform multi-adapter inference wherein you can combine different adapter checkpoints and perform inference. We discuss that in this section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also perform multi-adapter inference where you combine different adapter checkpoints for inference.
```

> We use the `set_adapters()` method to activate two LoRA checkpoints specifying weight coefficients with which the checkpoints should be combined.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once again, use the `set_adapters()` method to activate two LoRA checkpoints and specify the weight for how the checkpoints should be combined.
```

```python
# Change the argument name to `adapter_weights`.
pipe.set_adapters(["pixel", "toy"], adapter_weights=[0.5, 1.0])
```

> Now that we have set these two adapters, let's generate an image by combining the adapters!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have set these two adapters, let's generate an image from the combined adapters!
```

<Tip>

> LoRA checkpoints in the diffusion community are almost always obtained with [DreamBooth](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/training/dreambooth). DreamBooth training often relies on "trigger" words to be present in the input text prompts in order for the generation results to look as expected. So, when combining multiple LoRA checkpoints, it's important to keep this mind and ensure that the trigger words for the corresponding LoRA checkpoints are present in the input text prompts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LoRA checkpoints in the diffusion community are almost always obtained with [DreamBooth](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/main/en/training/dreambooth). DreamBooth training often relies on "trigger" words in the input text prompts in order for the generation results to look as expected. When you combine multiple LoRA checkpoints, it's important to ensure the trigger words for the corresponding LoRA checkpoints are present in the input text prompts.
```

</Tip>

> We can know about trigger words of the LoRA checkpoints being used from their repositories:
> 
> * [CiroN2022/toy-face](https://hf.co/CiroN2022/toy-face)
> * [nerijs/pixel-art-xl](https://hf.co/nerijs/pixel-art-xl)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The trigger words for [CiroN2022/toy-face](https://hf.co/CiroN2022/toy-face) and [nerijs/pixel-art-xl](https://hf.co/nerijs/pixel-art-xl) are found in their repositories.
```

```python

> # Notice how the promopt is constructed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Notice how the prompt is constructed.
```

prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie, pixel art"
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": 1.0}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

![toy-face-pixel-art](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_16_1.png)
    

> Impressive! As you can see, the model was able to generate an image that mixes the characteritics of both adapters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Impressive! As you can see, the model was able to generate an image that mixes the characteristics of both adapters.
```

> After performing multi-adapter inference, it's possible to again go back to single-adapter inference. With the `set_adapters()` method, it's easy:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to go back to using only one adapter, use the `set_adapters()` method to activate the `"toy"` adapter:
```

```python
# First, set the adapter.
pipe.set_adapters("toy")

# Then, run inference.
prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"
lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(
    prompt, num_inference_steps=30, cross_attention_kwargs={"scale": lora_scale}, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)
).images[0]
image
```

![toy-face-again](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_18_1.png)

> ## Disabling all adapters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> If you want to switch to the base model, you can disable all LoRAs with the `disable_lora()` method.

Reviewer 2: Would also be nice to link to the API docs for `disable_lora` 

```suggestion
If you want to switch to only the base model, disable all LoRAs with the `disable_lora()` method.
```

```python
pipe.disable_lora()

prompt = "toy_face of a hacker with a hoodie"
lora_scale= 0.9
image = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=30, generator=torch.manual_seed(0)).images[0]
image
```

![no-lora](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/diffusers/peft_integration/diffusers_peft_lora_inference_20_1.png)

> ## Monitoring active adapter

Author: ```suggestion
## Monitoring active adapters
```

> You have attached multiple adapters and you are a bit lost on what adapters have been attached to the pipeline's components? You can easily check the list of active adapters using the `get_active_adapters()` method as follows:

Reviewer 2: Same comment about linking to the `get_active_adapters` API doc

```suggestion
You have attached multiple adapters in this tutorial, and if you're feeling a bit lost on what adapters have been attached to the pipeline's components, you can easily check the list of active adapters using the `get_active_adapters()` method:
```

`python
active_adapters = pipe.get_active_adapters()
>>> ["toy", "pixel"]
`

> You can also get a component-wise breakdown of the active adapters like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also get the active adapters of each pipeline component with `get_list_adapters`:
```

```python

> list_adapters_component_wise = pipe. get_list_adapters()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
list_adapters_component_wise = pipe.get_list_adapters()
```

> >>> {"text_encoder": ["toy", "pixel"], "unet": ["toy", "pixel"], "text_encoder_2": ["toy", "pixel"]}

Reviewer: Tiny nit: don't forget to add ` ``` ` correctly here (did not added it directly when suggesting the changes because it conflicted with ```suggestion from GH

> You can also monitor the list of all attached adapters in your pipeline by simply calling `get_list_adapters()` that will return you a dictionary containing the component name as a key and the corresponding list of adapters as a value
> 
> `python
> list_adapters = pipe.get_active_adapters()
> >>> {"text_encoder": ["toy", "pixel"], "unet": ["toy", "pixel"], "text_encoder_2": ["toy", "pixel"]}
> `

Author: ```suggestion
You can also get a component-wise breakdown of the active adapters like so:

```python

list_adapters_component_wise = pipe. get_list_adapters()
>>> {"text_encoder": ["toy", "pixel"], "unet": ["toy", "pixel"], "text_encoder_2": ["toy", "pixel"]}
```
```
